[Music]
good morning welcome to breakfast with
louise minchin and dan walker our
headlines for you at six o'clock
urgent door-to-door testing for the
south african variant of coronavirus is
beginning in parts of england
nicholas sturgeon prepares to set out an
increased testing regime and stricter
quarantine rules for travellers entering
scotland
u.s president joe biden threatens to
reinstate sanctions
on myanmar after the country's military
seizes power
good morning by now pay later firms
could face regulation under new rules
announced later
critics say they encourage shoppers to
spend more than they can afford
and get into debt i'll speak to the
regulator and to the boss of one of the
biggest
clarner a little later liverpool move to
plug
a gap in their defense the premier
league champions bring in
ben davis from preston as well as a loan
signing
on a very quiet transfer deadline day
it's not quite with the weather today
the met office has an amber weather
warning
for heavy snow across parts of northern
england it's valid until lunchtime
widely we could have three to eight
centimeters above 200 meters we could
easily see
15 centimeters so disruption is likely
i'll have all the details later in the
programme
good morning to you a tuesday the 2nd of
february our main story
urgent tests are being offered to 80 000
people in england
after cases of a new south african
coronavirus variant were found
with no links to travel people across
eight
areas are being asked to take tests
whether they have symptoms or not after
the government said the uk
must come down hard on the variant andy
moore has more
ten thousand home testing kits delivered
to a fire station
in working in surrey from today the
operation to deliver them door to door
will begin
across england 80 000 people over the
age of 16
will be swabbed to find the true extent
of the new variant
there's no evidence it's more deadly but
it may be more contagious
mobile testing units like this one in
london will also be seen in the areas
where the new variant has been found
the health secretary says it's
imperative that people in the designated
areas
stick rigidly to the current guidelines
people should stay at home unless they
absolutely have to leave
and anybody anybody even thinking about
stretching the rules
in those areas must not the places where
the new variant has been discovered
are southport walsall woking broxborne
maidstone and three parts of london
it's really important that people see it
as a as a way of of surveillance really
we're not unduly concerned that we've
got a particular outbreak or
um you know this is covered the same as
the cupboard we've had since last march
so
the four nations have agreed tighter
border controls
that will see travellers from some
high-risk countries quarantining in
hotels at their own expense
but scotland's first minister nicolas
sturgeon said those measures don't go
far enough
today she will announce new measures
which it's reported
could see all arrivals into scotland
face quarantine
andy moore bbc news
i'll speak to ben bland who's at woking
fire station for
for us this morning which is being used
as a testing operational hub morning to
you just tell us
what you know about what's going on
there later
yes good morning in there right now 10
000 coronavirus home testing kits in
boxes
they are stacked up ready for a team of
volunteers to arrive
later this morning and deliver them to
people's homes people will then be asked
to take the test
at home themselves whether or not they
have symptoms
they don't have to book an appointment
they don't have to go to a testing site
the the tests will then be collected
brought back here
and then sent off for processing any
that come back
positive will be checked to see if they
are that new
south african variant of the virus now
that's because a couple of cases of the
south african variant have been
identified here in woking
that have not been linked to
international travel so scientists want
to find out
whether that variant is spreading
through the community
now the reason they want to keep tabs on
it is because they think as we heard in
andy's report
that the south african variant might be
easier to catch and pass on than the
original coronavirus so why it may while
it may not be any more deadly
and it may not cause any more severe
symptoms it means anyone who has that
variant
is more likely to pass it on to more
people the other question is whether
vaccines are effective at protecting us
against it
the early signs are that they are but
let's end on an optimistic note because
even if vaccines do need tweaking or
modifying
scientists say these new modern types of
vaccine well that can be done
within months or possibly even within
weeks
ben thank you very much indeed for that
and here on breakfast we'll be speaking
to the universities minister as well
michelle donnellan
um about that all sorts of other things
as well half past seven
also this morning captain tom captain
sir tom morgan his full names family are
with him in
hospital after he was admitted with
coronavirus on
sunday the 100 year old was taken to
bedford hospital
after requiring help with his breathing
uh breakfast john mcguire
is there for us this morning uh morning
to you john uh
there wasn't much news yesterday but
what more can you tell us this morning
yeah no real update down either
yesterday or this morning indeed on
captain sir tom's condition
as it were only to say of course that
staff here at bedford hospital are
continuing to care for
care for him but there was a statement
last night released by the hospital it
said with the agreement
of captain tom's two daughters anna
ingram
and lucy texera who we know very well
and have spoken too many times on the
program over the last 10 months or so
just to say that members of captain
tom's family
are with him at the hospital as we said
yesterday he was brought in
on sunday for help additional help to
enable him to breathe
easier he'd been diagnosed with
pneumonia a few weeks ago
hannah told us on sunday afternoon but
also had a positive covet test last week
not yet received the vaccine because of
the medication he'd been receiving
for his pneumonia but all family members
very much complimentary of the care he'd
received so far and complimentary two of
the care
they're expecting him to receive here
and knowing captain tom as we do knowing
he's such a strong family man i'm sure
having members of his family around him
and with him
will provide him with some solace and
help him hopefully
to make a speedy recovery john thank you
very much for that and
we'll be back with john if there's any
news on his condition throughout the
course of the program this morning
the devolved government in northern
ireland has suspended checks
of food consignments at the ports in
belfast and land because of concerns
about the safety of inspection staff
checks have been carried out on some
goods arriving from the rest of the uk
since the end of the brexit transition
period last month
an arrangement viewed by unionists as
representing an economic border in the
irish sea
all parties have condemned the
the actions s president joe biden has
threatened to reinstate sanctions
in myanmar after the country's military
seized power and arrested and sang soo
qi and other political leaders
the un and the uk have also condemned
the takeover amid fears of potential
protests and
unrest let's get the latest now from our
south east asia correspondent jonathan
head who joins us from bangkok and just
bring us up to date jonathan with the
latest developments
well the military is firmly in control
they've replaced the ousted elected
cabinet
with a new cabinet many of them soldiers
uh there's no sign of any protest and i
think that's very unlikely at this stage
people are still waiting to see what the
military will do
the party that was ousted and such party
the national league for democracy has
issued a public appeal on the military
to release
her and other politicians to allow the
results of last
year's election which her party won
resoundingly 80
of the seats to be respected and to
allow parliament to reconvene which it
was supposed to do
this week many western governments as
you mentioned the united states among
them britain
have condemned the coup supporting the
national league for democracy but i
don't think the military rulers are
going to listen or care much about that
general min online the new military
ruler who runs the country remember is
already accused of genocide over
atrocities against the rohingyas and
personally sanctioned by the united
states
so these this various pressure is
unlikely to have much impact
what we have to wait to see is what kind
of road map the military will announce
for moving forward
um it is very worried about aung san
tsuchi and her continued popularity
it kept her in prison for the best part
of 20 years in the past
i don't think he'll keep her detained
for long but they're going to have to
find a way to get back to some kind of
normalcy
they are saying eventually there will be
an election but they want to fix the
electoral system so their own party
doesn't do as badly as it did last year
jonathan head in bangkok thank you for
the update thank you
massive protests are expected in russia
today as one of president putin's
fiercest critics appears in court
thousands of demonstrators have already
been arrested they're demanding the
release of
opposition leader alexey navalny who's
accused the russian security forces
of trying to kill him let's speak to our
correspondent sarah rainsford who joins
us
uh live from moscow uh thank you very
much for being on the program with us
this morning so give us a bit more
information about what exactly will be
happening
well the courthouse that you can see
behind me is the one that will basically
decide alex xenobound his fate today uh
whether or not a suspended sentence that
he was given
several years ago could be converted now
into a custodial sentence so whether or
not essentially alex navalny the
fiercest critic of vladimir putin
will be going to prison now there's a
lot of riot police here
today i've never seen anything like it a
huge number of police
with their helmets on with their body
armor they're in all the streets around
here there are
barriers up as well they're preparing i
think to close the streets off
because mr navalny's supporters have
been called on
to gather here in protest against what's
happening we've seen that
for the last two weekends on the road
right across russia
thousands of supporters of alex say
navalny and other protesters coming out
onto the streets
calling for his release it is utterly
unprecedented and in fact the number of
detentions that we've seen
more than 5 000 last sunday alone so
even here in moscow the police detention
facilities
are jam-packed full so it is a really
extraordinary situation and a major
decision that's being made
here today which mr nevana's supporters
believe is political they believe all of
this
is about the fact that he's a challenger
to vladimir putin he's an
anti-corruption campaigner he's an
opposition figure here he's a man who
says
somebody tried to kill him with a nerve
agent here in russia back in august so
it is a court ruling that's being made
today but it is also in many ways a
political decision
that we'll see
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc
dot co dot uk forward slash news follow
the story for all the latest with bbc
news